In this video, we will talk about Ring-imaging Cherenkov detector.
The Ring-imaging Cherenkov detector is responsible for the particle type identification.
The particle types are muon,
kaon, pion, proton, and electron.
To identify a particle type the detector uses
a particle track and its momentum estimated in the tracking system.
The Ring-imaging Cherenkov detector is located before the calorimeter systems,
because it doesn't affect the flight of particles.
However, the detector stands after the tracking system
due to it uses tracks recognized in the tracking system.
Consider how it works.
The RICH detector is based on the Cherenkov radiation effect.
This effect describes a particle behavior in
material when it flies with a speed higher than the speed of light in this material.
When the particle flies with such speed, it emits light.
Let's look at the example.
Consider a particle flying with speed v in material with
refractive index n. We will detect the light emitted by the particle.
So, it's important to use transparent materials.
Typically, different gases are used in RICH detectors.
The refractive index of material is a ratio of the speed of
light in vacuum to the speed of light in this material.
When speed of the particle is larger than the speed of light in this material,
the particle emits photons in the cone.
Particles in high energy physics detectors fly with
speed very close to the speed of light in vacuum.
So, to emit light,
these particles require small refractive indices close to one.
Gases have such index values.
Moreover, gases have almost no effect on the particle flight.
The particle emits photons in the cone with emission angle zeta,
The emission angle zeta is defined by the refractive index of the material,
and the ratio of the particle speed to the speed of light in a vacuum as it shown on the slide.
Let's look closer at this equation.
It shows that the larger particles speed is a larger emission angle.
The larger the refractive index of the material,
the larger angle for a given particle speed.
Let's estimate how the Cherenkov emission angle
depends on the particle mass and momentum value.
From relativistic physics, it's known that
the particle momentum is defined by its mass and speed,
as it's shown by the first equation on the slide.
Here, beta is a ratio of the particle speed to the speed of light in the vacuum.
From the first equation,
we can estimate this ratio using
the particle mass and momentum as it's shown by the second equation.
Finally, we get the equation for cosine of
the Cherenkov emission angle shown on the bottom of the slide.
This equation shows that different particle types with different masses
have different dependencies of the emission angle from the particle momentum.
It allows to determine
the particle mass using its momentum measured in the tracking system,
and its emission angle estimated in the RICH detector.
Consider examples of these dependencies.
This slide demonstrates dependencies of the Cherenkov emission angle from
a particle momentum for the different particle types in the LHCb experiment.
So, if we know a particle momentum measured in the tracking system,
and the emission angle measured at RICH detector,
we can estimate the particle type,
and as a result, it's mass.
The detector identifies kaons, protons,
and pions very well;
however, muons behave similar to pions.
Also, notice that it's difficult to separate these dependencies
for the large emission angles and large particle momentum values.
So, other detectors are needed to improve the particle identification.
The RICH detector registers photons emitted by particles.
This photons are shown as orange circles in the figure.
The particle track position in the detector is represented as a blue triangle.
Based on the emission angle for the particle,
several circles for the different particle type hypotheses are plotted.
The hypothesis with the largest number photons wins.
However, it's not always easy to recognize correct circle.
In this case, different machine learning approaches can be used to
recognize rings and to identify a particle type in the RICH detector.
The challenge is that these approaches have to be
very fast to be able to process thousands of events per second.
This is all about the RICH detector.
In the next video, we will talk about calorimeters and how they measure particle energy.